===== PAGE 1 =====
GeoJournal
As you read this chapter, use your journal to
list and describe the cultural influences that
have shaped life in Latin America. Note how
both native and imported cultures have
formed a uniquely Latin American way of life.
Chapter Overview Visit the Glencoe World
Geography Web site at tx.geography.glencoe.com
and click on Chapter Overviews—Chapter 9 
to preview information about the cultural 
geography of the region.


===== PAGE 2 =====
Population Patterns
A Geographic View
A Flavorful Mix
More than any other Caribbean
island, Trinidad is a multiethnic
stew. Africans and East Indians,
each with about 40 percent of the
population, make up the base,
while smaller groups add their
own flavor. Spanish and French
families trace their roots to the
18th century, when their ances-
tors came to clear the land for
plantations or to trade. . . . 
Portuguese, Chinese, and 
Syrian immigrants became
merchants and shopkeepers.
Today Trinidadians compare
the resulting mix to callaloo, 
a soup with many ingredients.
—A. R. Williams, “The Wild Mix of Trinidad and Tobago,” 
National Geographic, March 1994
The island country of Trinidad and Tobago reflects in
miniature Latin America’s diverse population. In this section you will
learn how Latin America’s multiethnic population came about, how
the land shaped patterns of human migration, and what benefits and
challenges population growth and diversity bring to the region.
Human Characteristics
Latin America’s 525 million people—about 9 percent of the world’s
population—live in 33 countries that span more than half of the 
Western Hemisphere. The region’s population includes Native 
Americans, Europeans, Africans, Asians, and mixtures of these
groups. The bar graph on page 212 shows you the ethnic diversity
that characterizes Latin America today.
Guide to Reading
Consider What You Know
Think about what you have read
about the physical geography of
Latin America. What geographic 
factors influence where people 
have settled in this region?
Read to Find Out
• What ethnic groups make up the
population of Latin America?
• How have geography and eco-
nomics influenced the distribution
of Latin America’s population?
• How has migration affected the
Latin American culture region?
• In what ways does Latin America’s
cultural diversity present both
benefits and challenges for its
people?
Terms to Know
• indigenous
• dialect
• patois
• urbanization
• megacity
• primate city
Places to Locate
• Ecuador • Caracas
• Peru • Santiago
• Bolivia • Patagonia
• Guyana • Rio de Janeiro
• Buenos Aires • Barbados
Chapter 9 211
Woman at a Guatemalan market
Trinidad’s Laventille neighborhood


===== PAGE 3 =====
212 Unit 3
History
A Blending of Peoples
The ancestors of Native Americans were the first
people to settle Latin America. As a result, Native
Americans today are known as an indigenous
(ihn•DIH•juh•nuhs) group, people descended
from an area’s first inhabitants. Centuries ago three
Native American groups—the Maya of the Yucatán
Peninsula and parts of Central America, the Aztec
of Mexico, and the Inca of Peru’s highlands—
developed great civilizations with important cities
and ceremonial centers.
Today many Native American cultural features
still remain in parts of Latin America. Most of Latin
America’s present-day Native Americans live in
Mexico, Central America, and the Andes region of
Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia. In areas where they are
a large part of the population, Native American
peoples have worked to preserve their traditional
cultures while adopting features of other cultures.
Europeans first arrived in what is now Latin
America in the late 1400s. Since that time millions
of European imm igrants have come to the region.
Most of these settlers were Spanish and Portuguese.
Over the years other European groups—Italians,
British, French, and Germans—came as well. In mod-
ern times so many Europeans settled in Argentina and
Uruguay that these countries became known as immi-
grant nations. In Latin America today, descendants of
European immigrants continue to follow many of the
ways of life their ancestors brought with them.
Africans first came to Latin America in the 1500s.
They arrived as enslaved people, brought forcibly by
Europeans to work sugar and other cash crop plan-
tations in Brazil and the Caribbean islands. The labor
of enslaved Africans helped build Latin American
economies. By the late 1800s, slavery had finally
ended in the region. Many Africans whose families
had been in Latin America for generations remained
in parts of the region. They added their rich cultural
Brazil
Guyana
Venezuela
Argentina
Guatemala
Dominican
Republic
Peru
Mexico
0 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 0
85% 15%
6% 38% 55%
10% 2% 67% 21%
32% 6% 12% 49%
11% 16% 73%
30% 60% 9% 1%
1%
1%
44% 56%
45% 37% 15% 3%
* Two or more ethnic groups
Source: World Almanac, 2001
GRAPH STUDY
Ethnic Groups in Selected Latin American Countries
African
Native American
Mixed*
S Asian/SE Asian
European
Other
1. Interpreting Graphs
Which country has the larg-
est percentage of people of
European heritage in its 
population?
2. Applying Geography
Skills What factors helped
influence the ethnic variety 
in Latin America?


===== PAGE 4 =====
Chapter 9 213
influences to the food, music, arts, and religions of
Latin America.
Asians first settled in Latin America during the
1800s. They labored as temporary workers, and
many remained to form ethnic communities.
Today the Caribbean islands and some countries
of South America have large Asian populations. In
Guyana about one-half of the population is of
South Asian or Southeast Asian descent. Many
people of Chinese descent make their homes in
Peru, Mexico, and Cuba, and many people of
Japanese descent live in Brazil and Peru.
Over the centuries there has been a blending 
of these different ethnic groups throughout Latin
America. For example, in countries such as Mexico,
Honduras, and El Salvador, people of mixed Native
American and European descent make up the largest
part of the population. In other countries, such as
Cuba and the Dominican Republic, people of mixed
African and European descent form a large per-
centage of the population.
Language
Language is a major factor in bringing
together the diverse ethnic groups of Latin
America. Most people in the region have
adopted the languages of the European countries
that once colonized the region. Today Spanish is
the primary language of most countries of Latin
America. However, other languages also are spo-
ken. For example, the official language of Brazil is
Portuguese; of Haiti and Martinique, French; and
of Jamaica, Belize, and Guyana, English.
Not all Latin Americans, however, speak these
European languages the same way as, or even in a
way similar to, the original European colonists. Each
country has its own dialects, forms of a language
unique to a particular place or group. Meanings of
words and the words themselves often differ from
one place to another.
In addition, millions of Latin Americans speak
Native American languages. In Central America,
Mayan dialects such as K’iche’ (kee•CHAY) are com-
mon. Tupi-Guarani predominates in Paraguay and
Brazil. Aymara is spoken in Bolivia, and Quechua
(KEH•chuh•wuh) in Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia.
Many Latin Americans are bilingual, speaking
two languages—a European language and another
language, either indigenous, African, or Asian. Other
Latin Americans speak one of many Latin American
forms of patois (PA•TWAH), dialects that blend ele-
ments of indigenous, European, African, and
Asian languages.
Where Latin 
Americans Live
In addition to having a diverse population, Latin
America today has a high rate of population
growth. By most estimates the region’s popula-
tion will soar to about 800 million by the year
2050—an increase of 55 percent. This high growth
rate magnifies the challenges to human patterns of
Atlantic
Ocean
Pacific
Ocean
English
English
English
Creole
FrenchDutch
60°W80°W100°W120°W
40°S
20°S
0°
TROPIC OF CANCER
TROPIC OF CAPRICORN
EQUATOR
N
Azimuthal Equal-Area projection
2,500
2,5000 mi.
0 km
Find NGS online map resources @ www.nationalgeographic.com/maps
English
Dutch
French
Spanish
Portuguese
Creole
Native
American
languages
MAP
STUDY
Latin America: Languages
1. Interpreting Maps Where are Native American
languages spoken?
2. Applying Geography Skills How might the
areas where some languages are spoken relate
to the region’s history of colonial settlement?


===== PAGE 5 =====
214 Unit 3
settlement already presented by Latin America’s
physical geography.
Latin America’s varied climates and landscapes
have an impact on where Latin Americans live. Tem-
perature extremes, dense rain forests, towering
mountains, and arid deserts limit human habitation
in many parts of Latin America. In fact, most of Latin
America’s population lives on only one-third of the
region’s land.
About 350 million people live in South America,
generally along the coasts. Another 138 million peo-
ple live in Central America and Mexico, either along
Central America’s Pacific coast or on the inland Mex-
ican Plateau and Central Highlands. The Caribbean
island countries are home to 37 million people.
South America’s Populated Rim
Rain forests, deserts, and mountains dominate
South America’s interior. In these areas harsh liv-
ing conditions and poor soil discourage human
settlement. As a result, most South Americans live
on the continent’s edges, an area sometimes known
as the “populated rim.” The coastal regions pro-
vide favorable climates, fertile land, and easy
access to transportation systems.
South America’s eastern coast,
from the mouth of the Amazon
River in Brazil to the pampas
around Buenos Aires, Argentina, is
Latin America’s largest populated
area. A narrower strip of densely
populated land stretches along the
continent’s northern and western
coast from Caracas, Venezuela, to
Santiago, Chile.
South America’s populated rim
does not encircle the entire conti-
nent, however. For example, the
eastern coast between the Amazon’s
mouth and Caracas has a hot, rainy
climate and is sparsely populated.
Another area of low population
density lies to the far south in the
Andes and Patagonia, where the cli-
mate and land are harsh.
With the exception of Native
Americans, few South Americans
live in the continent’s inland areas.
To draw people away from the
densely populated coast, the Brazilian govern-
ment in 1960 moved the capital from coastal Rio
de Janeiro to Brasília, a planned city built in the
country’s interior.
Population Density
As the population density map on page 184
shows, population density varies greatly through-
out Latin America. One important factor in a
country’s population density is its area. South
American countries, with their relatively large
land areas, tend to have low population densities.
In Ecuador, the most densely populated country in
South America, an average of only 118 people
share a square mile (46 people per sq. km). Brazil
has a large population, but its enormous land area,
over 3.3 million square miles (8.5 million sq. km),
results in a population density averaging only 52
people per square mile (20 people per sq. km).
Caribbean countries, in contrast, combine small
land areas with large populations that tend to
grow at rapid rates. These factors make the
Caribbean countries some of the most densely
populated in Latin America. The tiny island nation
of Barbados has the highest population density in
Latin American
Immigration These floral arrangers, in the state of São Paulo,
Brazil, are part of a community of Japanese Brazilians.
Movement Why have Asian and European immigrants settled in
Latin America?


===== PAGE 6 =====
Chapter 9 215
the Caribbean, with an average of 1,620 people per
square mile (698 people per sq. km).
Population density also varies within countries.
With 99.6 million people, Mexico is the world’s most
populous Spanish-speaking country, and it is the
second most populous country in Latin America,
after Brazil. Mexico’s population and its land area of
756,000 square miles (1.9 million sq. km) give it a
population density of 132 people per square mile (51
people per sq. km), making Mexico seem relatively
uncrowded. This overall density rate is only an
average, however. In metropolitan Mexico City,
more than 18 million people live within an area of
597 square miles (1,547 sq. km). That makes the pop-
ulation density of Mexico City a staggering 30,150
people per square mile (11,641 people per sq. km)!
Migration
Migration has been a major force shaping popu-
lation patterns in Latin America. As a geography
writer recently observed,
“
Migration is . . . everyone’s solution,
everyone’s conflict. . . . Unlike the flight
of refugees, which is usually chaotic,
economic movement is a chain that
links the world. Migration . . . continues
to push us toward change.
”
Michael Parfit, “Human 
Migration,” National Geographic,
October 1998
In past centuries Europeans, Africans, and
Asians migrated to Latin America in large num-
bers, either voluntarily or involuntarily. Today
people from places such as Korea, Armenia,
Lebanon, and Syria come to Latin America seeking
economic and political opportunities.
Migrating North
In addition to receiving an inflow of migrants
from foreign countries, Latin America also experi-
ences an outflow of people to different parts of the
world. For many Latin Americans, the desire for
improved living conditions, political freedom, or
an escape from political unrest leads them to
move north to the United States. Latin Americans
come to the United States primarily from Mexico,
Central America, and the Caribbean islands.
Immigrants from Latin America live in every state
of the Union, with large numbers in California,
Texas, New York, Illinois, and Florida. Many Latin
American immigrants go through the process of
legally entering the United States; others enter
illegally. All of these immigrants bring elements of
their culture with them. Most retain close ties with
family and friends in their home countries, and
many intend to return when economic conditions
there improve.
Internal Migration
Internal migration, or movement within a
region or country, also has shaped Latin America
Market
Street in La Paz A crowded street in La Paz,
Bolivia, shows the effects of rapid urbanization.
Movement How does internal migration contribute 
to urbanization in the region?


===== PAGE 7 =====
216 Unit 3
in recent decades. As in many parts of the world,
migrants within Latin America usually move from
rural to urban areas because of better job oppor-
tunities in the cities. This one-way migration also
occurs because in many rural areas fertile land is
in short supply or a small portion of the popula-
tion controls access to the land. As the rural popu-
lation rises, there is less fertile land to go around.
Smaller farms can no longer support families.
The result is continuing, rapid urbanization—
the migration of people from the countryside
to cities as well as the change from a rural to an
urban society that accompanies this movement.
Growth of Cities
In the past most Latin Americans lived in the
countryside and worked the land. Today most live in
urban areas. Four cities of Latin America—Mexico
City, Mexico; São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil;
More than $10,000
$2,000 – $10,000
Less than $2,000
Labor migration
trend
Income and Labor
Migration
(per capita income
in U.S. dollars)
Lambert Azimuthal
Equal-Area projection
N
1,000
1,0000
0km
mi.
120°W 100 °W8 0 °W6 0 °W4 0 °W
TROPIC OF CANCER
EQUATOR
Pacific
Ocean
Atlantic
Ocean
NORTH
AMERICA
SOUTH AMERICA
Mexico City
S˜ao Paulo
Buenos
Aires
Los Angeles
New York City
Miami
Maracaibo
San Juan
Havana
Toronto
MAP STUDY
Latin America: Migration and Urbanization
People in Latin America continue to
look to urban areas, both inside and
outside the region, for work and a bet-
ter life. Most often people migrate to
areas of higher economic prosperity.
For example, people migrate from
Mexico to the United States. However,
migration also occurs within Latin
America. Migration has caused an
increase in the levels of urbanization
throughout the region.
Level of Urbanization
1970 2001 2025*
Argentina 78% 90% 93%
Bolivia 36% 63% 76%
Brazil 56% 81% 86%
Guatemala 37% 39% 42%
Mexico 59% 74% 82%
Latin America 57% 74% 81%
*Projected figures.
Sources: World Population Data Sheet, 2001;
United Nations Population Division; Economic 
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
Find NGS online map resources @ www.nationalgeographic.com/maps
1. Interpreting Maps Which countries receive a
significant inflow of labor migration?
2. Applying Geography Skills Study the levels
of urbanization in Argentina and Guatemala. How
do they compare with the region as a whole?


===== PAGE 8 =====
Chapter 9 217
Checking for Understanding
1. Define indigenous, dialect,
patois, urbanization, megacity,
primate city.
2. Main IdeasCreate a web diagram
like the one below, and fill in impor-
tant information about Latin Amer-
ica’s people.
Critical Thinking
3. Analyzing Cause and Effect What
factors account for the differences
in the way Spanish is spoken in
various Latin American countries?
4. Drawing Conclusions Develop a
hypothesis describing probable
population patterns in Latin
America in the year 2050. Defend
your hypothesis, using present
trends as evidence.
5. Making Inferences In what ways
might physical geography influ-
ence the development of mega-
cities in Latin America?
Analyzing Maps
6. Region Study the language map
on page 213. What is the most
widely spoken language in 
Central America?
7. Population Density Con-
sider the physical geogra-
phy of Latin America. Write
a paragraph suggesting
suitable locations for con-
structing new cities to
relieve population pressures
in Latin America’s existing
cities. Consider the kinds of
resources required to sustain
large populations.
Applying Geography 
and Buenos Aires, Argentina—now rank among the
world’s 20 largest urban areas in population.
The Urban Setting
In some Latin American countries, as cities have
grown they have absorbed surrounding cities and
suburbs to create megacities, cities with more than
10 million people. The region’s largest megacity is
Mexico City, with a current population of more than
18 million. By 2015, the city is expected to have 
19.2 million people. Mexico City’s rapidly growing
population already stresses the city’s ability to pro-
vide safe drinking water, underground sewers, and
utilities for new arrivals. Although the city has many
areas with comfortable homes, its challenge for the
future is to provide adequate housing for many who
now live in cardboard shacks or makeshift houses
made from sheets of metal.
Because of its size and influence, Mexico City is a
primate city, an urban area that dominates its coun-
try’s economy, culture, and political affairs. Other
primate cities in Latin America include Caracas,
Venezuela; Montevideo, Uruguay; Santiago, Chile;
Buenos Aires, Argentina; and Havana, Cuba. Many
primate cities began near waterways during the colo-
nial era. Today these cities serve as central locations
for gathering, collecting, and shipping resources
overseas. They are especially powerful magnets for
rural migrants seeking a higher standard of living.
Urban Challenges
Most rural Latin Americans migrate to cities to
find a better life—higher incomes, more educational
opportunities, better housing, and increased access
to health care. In many cases people do not find
what they seek. As a city’s resources are strained by
rapid population growth, jobs and housing become
scarce. At the same time, many rural people lack the
education and skills to obtain urban employment.
Schools and health care centers are overwhelmed. 
Despite disappointments, most rural migrants do
not have the resources to return to their villages.
They remain in the cities, forced by poverty to live in
neighborhoods with substandard housing, poor
sanitation, and little opportunity for improvement.
Families sometimes split apart under the stress,
leaving large numbers of homeless children to fend
for themselves on the streets.
Many of Latin America’s urban challenges arise
from modern developments, such as the growth of
cities. Others, however, stem from social and eco-
nomic issues deeply rooted in the past. In the next
section you will read about the historical factors
that still shape current ways of life in Latin America.
Latin America’s
People
Who they are
Where they live


===== PAGE 9 =====
PASSAGE THROUGH PANAMAPASSAGE THROUGH PANAMA
AND
A freighter winds its way
through the Panama Canal.
GEOGRAPHY
HISTORY
L
218 Unit 3
T
HE PANAMA CANAL, a vital water-
way connecting the Atlantic and
Pacific Oceans, has been an impor-
tant trade route since the day it
opened. About 14,000 ships pass
through the canal’s system of locks and
lakes each year. Using the canal, ships can
avoid the treacherous waters around Cape
Horn at the southern tip of South America
and can shave 7,000 miles (11,265 km) off
their trip. For most of the twentieth cen-
tury, the United States controlled the
canal.This changed on the last day of
1999, when control passed to the
nation of Panama.Today the United
States and other countries anxiously
watch how Panama operates this
international shortcut between the
world’s largest oceans.
Big Dreams and Political Shenanigans
Spanish explorer Vasco Núñez de Balboa
was the first to grasp the unique geo-
graphic features of the land in Central
America known today as Panama. In 1513,
while exploring the isthmus, he climbed a
peak and discovered a body of water as
vast as the Atlantic, the ocean he had left
behind. It wasn’t long before thoughts
turned to building a waterway to breach
the slender neck of land that connects
Central and South America. The limitations
of manual labor, however, kept the idea in
Caribbean
Sea
Pacific
Ocean
PANAMA
CANAL
PANAMA
COSTA
RICA
COLOMBIA
150
1500
0
mi.
km


===== PAGE 10 =====
the realm of dreams for
more than 300 years.
By the late 1800s, tech-
nology had caught up with
the imagination. The first to
try to build a waterway was
Frenchman Ferdinand de
Lesseps, who masterminded
the Suez Canal. Cutting
through the mountainous
terrain proved extremely difficult, and de Lesseps failed. But one of
his engineers, Philippe Jean Bunau-Varilla, refused to quit. In 1901 he
pitched the idea to U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt, who was will-
ing to pay the engineer’s price if Colombia, of which Panama was a
part, relinquished control of the proposed canal route.When Colombia
refused, Bunau-Varilla supported Panamanian revolutionaries and 
persuaded the United States to intervene. The presence of American
gunboats was enough to make Colombia give in. Panama became an
independent country. Bunau-Varilla, Panama’s new minister to the
United States, negotiated a treaty giving the United States control 
of the land along the proposed route. In 1904 construction began.
Engineering Wonder of the World
Nearly 75,000 laborers from around the world built what is still
regarded as one of the engineering wonders of the world. Instead of
trying to make a cut through the rugged hills to carry ships across at
sea level, the American solution was to build a system of locks to lift
ships up to a newly created lake, and in the same way, lower them
down the other side.The volcanic soil, heat and rain, dense vegeta-
tion, and disease-spreading insects conspired to make progress
painfully slow. Thousands of workers lost their lives, and costs grew
to more than $380 million.The canal was completed in 1914.
1500s First road built 
across isthmus
1855 American business 
interests build railroad
across isthmus
1881 French company
begins building a sea
level canal; project
abandoned  in 1887
1903 Backed by U.S.
President Theodore
Roosevelt (cartoon
above), Panama
becomes independent
country and signs
treaty to create
Panama Canal Zone
1904 Work begins on the 
Panama Canal (back-
ground photo)
1914 First ship passes
through canal 
1977 U.S. and Panama sign
Panama Canal Treaty,
gradually transferring
ownership to Panama
1999 Canal ownership 
transfers to Panama
Canal enthusiast Theodore
Roosevelt operates a steam
shovel at a canal work site.L
Unit 3 219
Looking Ahead
In acquiring the Panama Canal, the Panamanians gained a sizable
investment. Do you think Panama will find the resources to main-
tain and operate the canal? How might the United States be 
affected by the change in command?


===== PAGE 11 =====
Guide to Reading
Consider What You Know
Latin American politics and social
conflicts often make news in the
United States. How are Latin American
governments similar to or different
from the United States government?
Read to Find Out
• What contributions have Latin
America’s Native American
empires made to the region’s 
cultural development?
• How has colonial rule influenced
Latin America’s political and social
structures?
• How did most Latin American
countries make the transition from
colonialism to democracy?
• What political and social factors
continue to challenge the Latin
American culture region?
Terms to Know
• glyph
• chinampas
• quipu
• conquistador
• viceroy
• caudillo
Places to Locate
• Mexico
• Tikal
• Tenochtitlán
• Cuzco
• Haiti
• Cuba
History and
Government
A Geographic View
Native Rights Protest
Drawn machetes slapped against 
trouser legs. Dark eyes stared in 
anger. About 40 Tojolabal Indian men
and women surrounded two men. . . .
They talked angrily, and the phrase
that came through was, “This is our
land.” The sharp edges of the machetes
gleamed. . . . These Indians might be
Zapatistas, rebel Indian farmers
named for Mexico’s revolutionary
war hero Emiliano Zapata. . . . 
—Michael Parfit, “Chiapas: Rough 
Road to Reality,” National Geographic,
August 1996
In 1994 the Zapatistas attacked government troops and
captured several towns in southern Mexico. One of their aims was to
recover lands that Spanish conquerors had seized from their ances-
tors four centuries earlier. They finally succeeded in pressuring the
Mexican government to introduce reforms giving Native Americans
more power in Mexico’s political system. Throughout Latin America
today people struggle with unresolved issues rooted in the past. In
this section you will learn about Latin America’s long and often vio-
lent history, which includes ancient Native American civilizations,
European colonial rule, and struggles for independence.
Native American Empires
Years before Christopher Columbus arrived in the Americas in
1492, three Native American empires—the Maya, the Aztec, and
the Inca—flourished in the area that is present-day Latin America.
220 Unit 3
Zapatista protesters, Chiapas, M
exico


===== PAGE 12 =====
Chapter 9 221
The civilization of each empire left enduring marks
on Latin American cultures. 
The Maya
The Maya dominated southern Mexico and
northern Central America from about A.D. 250
to 900. They established many cities, the greatest of
which was Tikal, located in what is today
Guatemala. Terraces, courts, and pyramid-shaped
temples stood in these cities. Priests and nobles
ruled the cities and surrounding areas. The Maya
based their economy on agriculture and trade.
Skilled in mathematics, the Maya developed
accurate calendars and used astronomical observa-
tions to predict solar eclipses. They used glyphs,
picture writings carved in stone, on temples to
honor their deities and record their history.
For reasons that are still a mystery, the Maya
eventually abandoned their cities, which over time
became lost beneath the vegetation of the rain for-
est. Archaeologists continue to search for more
information about the ancient Maya. Researchers
have uncovered the ruins of over 40 Mayan cities,
but most of the glyphs remain untranslated. Today
many temple ruins are popular tourist attractions.
Descendants of the Maya still live in villages in
southern Mexico and northern Central America,
where they practice subsistence farming.
The Aztec
The Aztec civilization arose in central Mexico,
in the A.D. 1300s. The Aztec founded their capital,
Tenochtitlán (tay•NAWCH•teet•LAHN), today the
site of Mexico City, on an island in a large lake. To
feed the growing population, Aztec farmers grew
beans and maize on chinampas—floating “islands”
made from large rafts covered with mud from the
lake bottom.
The Aztec developed a highly structured class
system headed by an emperor and military offi-
cials. High-ranking priests performed rituals to
win the deities’ favor and to guarantee good har-
vests. At the bottom of Aztec society were the
majority—farmers, laborers, and soldiers.
Culture
Gifts to the World’s Tables
Several foods grown by the Aztec have become
worldwide favorites. Corn, a staple food of Latin
America, came from the maize cultivated by the
Aztec. The tomato, later used in Mediterranean
cuisine, was unknown in Europe until the Euro-
pean conquest of Latin America. From bitter cacao
beans, the Aztec made a concoction called xocoatl
(chocolate), or “food of the gods.”
The Inca
During the time of the Aztec, the Inca estab-
lished a civilization in the Andes mountain ranges
of South America. At its height the Incan Empire
stretched from what is today Ecuador to central
TROPIC OF CANCER
TROPIC OF CAPRICORN
EQUATOR
Tikal
Atlantic
Ocean
Pacific
Ocean
Cuzco
Machu Picchu
Tenochtitl´an Chich´en Itz´a
60°W80°W100°W120°W
40°S
20°S
0°
N
Azimuthal Equal-Area projection
2,500
2,5000 mi.
0 km
MAP
STUDY
Native American Empires
Find NGS online map resources @ www.nationalgeographic.com/maps
Aztec Empire
Maya Empire
Inca Empire
1. Interpreting Maps In which empire was
Machu Picchu located?
2. Applying Geography Skills The Inca Empire
stretched across lands that are part of what
present-day countries?


===== PAGE 13 =====
Colonial Economies
The European colonies in the Americas became
sources of wealth for the home countries. Some
Spanish settlers prospered from the mining of gold
and silver. The Portuguese discovered precious
metals in Brazil and made use of brazilwood, 
222 Unit 3
Chile. The Inca built their capital, Cuzco, in what
is now Peru and ruled their lands through a cen-
tral government headed by an emperor.
Using precisely cut stones, Incan builders con-
structed massive temples and fortresses. They
laid out a network of roads that crossed high
mountain passes and penetrated dense forests. To
keep soil from washing away, Incan farmers cut
terraces into the steep slopes of the Andes and
built irrigation systems to bring water to Pacific
coast deserts. The Inca also domesticated the
alpaca and the llama, which they used for wool.
With no written language, the Inca used oral sto-
rytelling to pass on knowledge to each genera-
tion. To keep track of financial records, Incan
traders used a quipu (KEE•poo), a series of knot-
ted cords of various colors and lengths. Each knot
represented a different item or number.
Empires to Nations
Beginning with Christopher Columbus’s voy-
ages from 1492 to 1504, Europeans explored and
colonized vast areas of the Americas. The major
European powers of Spain and Portugal ruled
huge territories from Mexico to southern South
America. Later Great Britain, France, and the
Netherlands colonized in the Caribbean area and
parts of northern South America.
European Conquests
From the West Indies, the Spaniards expanded
into other parts of the Americas. Desiring riches,
Spanish conquistador, or conqueror, Hernán
Cortés in 1521 defeated the Aztec and claimed
Mexico for Spain. In 1535 another conquistador,
Francisco Pizarro, destroyed the Incan Empire in
Peru and began Spain’s South American empire.
The Portuguese settled on the coast of Brazil.
As a result of these conquests, European colonies
gradually arose throughout Latin America. In
Spanish-ruled territories, for example, the con-
querors set up highly structured political systems
under royally appointed officials known as
viceroys. The Roman Catholic Church became the
major unifying institution in both Spanish and
Portuguese colonies. Missionaries from Europe
converted the Native Americans to Christianity
and set up schools and hospitals.
British
Rio de Janeiro
Buenos Aires
Lima
Mexico
City
Havana
Panama City
Bogot´a
VICEROYALTY
OF LA PLATA
VICEROYALTY
OF BRAZIL
VICEROYALTY OF PERU
VICEROYALTY OF
NEW GRANADA
GUIANA
VICEROYALTY OF
SANTO DOMINGO
VICEROYALTY
OF NEW SPAIN
Atlantic
Ocean
Pacific
Ocean
60°W80°W 40°W100°W120°W
40°S
20°N
20°S
0°
TROPIC OF CANCER
TROPIC OF CAPRICORN
EQUATOR
N
1,500
1,5000 mi.
0 km
Lambert Azimuthal
Equal-Area projection
MAP
STUDY
European Colonial
Empires, 1790
Find NGS online map resources @ www.nationalgeographic.com/maps
Spanish lands
Portuguese lands
British lands
Dutch lands
French lands
1. Interpreting Maps What European countries
ruled Guiana?
2. Applying Geography Skills Compare this map
with a political map. What present-day countries
emerged from the Viceroyalty of New Granada?


===== PAGE 14 =====
Chapter 9 223
a tree used to make red dye. Spanish and Por-
tuguese colonists also built cities and towns that
served as trade centers and seats of government.
In the tropics their plantations grew coffee,
bananas, and sugarcane for export to Europe. In
cool highlands areas, they established farms and
cattle ranches.
The Spaniards and Portuguese used Native 
Americans to work on the plantations and ranches.
As epidemic diseases and hardships drastically
reduced the numbers of Native Americans, the
European colonists imported enslaved Africans to
meet the labor shortage. Despite European domi-
nance many aspects of the Native American and
African ways of life survived, creating a blend of the
cultures of three continents in Latin America.
Gaining Independence
In the late 1700s, resentment against European
rule spread throughout Latin America. Wealthy
colonists of European origin wanted self-rule.
Those Europeans lower on the social scale de-
manded more rights. Native Americans and Africans
simply yearned for freedom from servitude.
Encouraged by the revolutions in North America
and France, many Latin Americans joined together
to end European colonial rule.
The first Latin American country to gain its inde-
pendence was Haiti, located on the Caribbean
island of Hispaniola. In the 1790s François Tous-
saint-Louverture (frahn•SWAH TOO• SAN•LOO•
vuhr•TYUR), a soldier born of enslaved parents, led a
revolt by enslaved Africans. By 1804 Haiti had won
its independence from France. The first Spanish-
ruled country in Latin America to win indepen-
dence was Mexico. The independence movement
there began in 1810 and was led by a parish priest,
Father Miguel Hidalgo. After a long struggle, Mex-
ico became independent in 1821.
Other territories in Latin America also sought
independence. By the mid-1800s most of them had
achieved their goal under such leaders as Simón
Bolívar of Venezuela and José de San Martín
of Argentina. However, only one country—
Brazil—became independent without a violent
upheaval.
Except for Haiti, Caribbean island countries
were the last territories in Latin America to achieve
architecture of LATIN AMERICA
Modern Architecture The dome and towers of the
Palacio do Congresso (right) in Brasí lia, Brazil, reflect
the sleek, modern style of Brazilian architect Oscar
Niemeyer. The major government buildings in Brasí lia
were planned and built in the 1950s and 1960s.
Colonial Architecture Built in the 1500s, the chapel
Nuestra Señora de los Remedios (below) in Cholula,
Mexico, is typical of Spanish colonial architecture. 
Colonial buildings often reflect a mixture of European
styles with Native American and African influences.


===== PAGE 15 =====
224 Unit 3
independence. Cuba, for example, did not win its
freedom from Spain until 1898. British-ruled
islands, such as Jamaica and Barbados, did not
gain independence until well into the 1900s. Even
today some islands remain under foreign control;
for example, Martinique is a possession of France,
the Cayman Islands of Great Britain, and Curaçao
of the Netherlands. In addition, Puerto Rico and
some of the Virgin Islands have political links to
the United States.
Era of Dictatorships
Latin America’s wars for independence ush-
ered in a period of political and economic insta-
bility. During the 1800s some leaders in the
region wanted to build democratic institutions
and prosperous economies. However, they had
to contend with the legacy of indigenous and Euro-
pean class structures, which stressed rank and priv-
ilege. As a result, political and economic power
often remained in the hands of a small group of
wealthy landowners, army officers, and clergy.
Written constitutions were ignored, public dis-
satisfaction led to revolts, and governments
relied on the military to keep order. 
In this chaotic situation, a new kind of leader
emerged—the caudillo (kow•DEE•yoh), or dic-
tator. With the backing of military forces and
wealthy landowners, caudillos became absolute
rulers with sole authority to make decisions.
Movements for Change
During the 1900s Latin America experienced dra-
matic political, social, and economic changes. As
European rule declined, the influence of the United
States increased in the region. For example, after
Panama became an independent country in 1903,
the United States and Panama signed a treaty creat-
ing the Panama Canal Zone. The formation of
industries, the building of railroads, and the expan-
sion of trade all brought new wealth to the upper
classes. These developments also created new
middle and working classes in the cities. However,
for the vast majority of Latin Americans, especially
rural dwellers, progress was limited.
As the gap between the rich and the poor
widened, unrest spread among farmers and work-
ers. Conservative dictators and military govern-
ments resisted demands for reform and crushed
uprisings. In Cuba, however, a revolution in 1959
set up a communist state under Fidel Castro.
During the 1990s communism remained en-
trenched in Cuba, but military dictatorships gave
way to democratically elected governments in a
Latin America’s Independence Leaders
François Toussaint-
Louverture led enslaved
Haitians in a violent revolt
against French rule. He died
in a French prison in 1803.
Father Miguel Hidalgo
called on Mexicans to 
fight for “Indepen-
dence and Liberty” 
from Spain. He was 
executed in 1811.
José de San Martín of
Argentina led his Latin
American forces across the
Andes to win indepen-
dence for Chile and Peru.
Called “the Liberator,” Simón
Bolívar of Venezuela 
won freedom for the 
present-day countries of
Venezuela, Colombia,
Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia.
Student Web Activity Visit the Glencoe World Geography
Web site at tx.geography.glencoe.comand click on Student Web
Activities— Chapter 9 for an activity about the Panama Canal.


===== PAGE 16 =====
New President In his campaign, Vicente Fox
(shown here with Rigoberta Menchú) promised bet-
ter public education and more attention to the poor.
Region What political issues are important in Latin
America today?
Chapter 9 225
Checking for Understanding
1. Define glyph, chinampas, 
quipu, conquistador, viceroy,
caudillo.
2. Main Ideas Create a web diagram
like the one below for each
Native American culture, and
show its major achievements.
Then choose one achievement
and explain why it was important.
Critical Thinking
3. Making Comparisons How was
the social structure of the Aztec
Empire similar to the social struc-
tures of Latin America under
European colonialism?
4. Drawing Conclusions Was the 
plantation system beneficial or
harmful? Explain.
5. Analyzing Information According
to Rigoberta Menchú, how can
diversity bring unity? Do you
agree or disagree with her assess-
ment, and what steps would you
take to bring about unity?
Analyzing Maps
6. Region Compare the maps of 
Latin America and the colonial
empires on pages 195 and 222.
Which Spanish viceroyalty was
named for a geographic feature
of Latin America?
7. Development and History
On a time line trace the
development of indigenous
and European empires in
Latin America. Include at
least one achievement that
occurred during each empire.
Applying Geography 
number of countries. Today Latin American coun-
tries are struggling to end corrupt politics and bring
economic benefits to all their citizens. In Mexico, for
example, nearly 70 years of one-party rule ended in
the year 2000 when the candidate of the ruling
party PRI ( Partido Revolucionario Institucional) lost
the presidency to Vicente Fox of the opposition
party PAN (Partido Acción Nacional) in a genuinely
democratic election.
As Latin America entered the 2000s, Native
Americans, farmers, and workers demanded more
political power and greater economic benefits. A
spokeswoman for Guatemala’s modern-day Maya
people, Rigoberta Menchú, discusses the need for
greater inclusion in political processes:
“
National unity must be defined in the
context of the right of the whole society
to diversity, protected by and reflected
in a democratic state. Eventually gov-
ernments will have to tackle the issue
of the self-determination of diverse peo-
ples within national boundaries. . . .We
must accept that humanity is a beau-
tiful multicolored garden.
”
Rigoberta Menchú (Ann Wright,
trans.), Crossing Borders, 1998
Culture


===== PAGE 17 =====
Guide to Reading
Consider What You Know
Latin American foods and music are
popular in the United States and
around the world. How do people
today discover and learn about the
cultural traditions of Latin America?
Read to Find Out
• What role does religion play in
Latin American culture?
• How have Latin Americans used
the arts to express their history,
their social struggles, and their
cultural diversity?
• How is Latin America’s cultural
diversity reflected in family life,
leisure activities, and public
celebrations?
Terms to Know
• syncretism
• mural
• mosaic
• extended family
• malnutrition
• fútbol
• jai alai
Places to Locate
• West Indies
• Dominican Republic
• Guatemala
• Brasília
• Chile
Cultures and
Lifestyles
A Geographic View
Shadows of the Ancients
Doffing his mask, a member of Los 
Panchitos dance troupe takes a breather
from the vigorous street dancing. . . .
With its origins deep in the past, the
dance pokes fun at figures of the pres-
ent. . . . The finger of ridicule points 
to a landowner who abuses peasant
workers, a judge who decides a case
in favor of the rich. . . . 
—Michael E. Long, “Enduring Echoes of
Peru’s Past,” National Geographic, 
June 1990
The past and present intermingle in the lives of
Latin Americans. Here, along Peru’s northern coast, a masked dance
blends Native American and European influences, music and visual
arts, religion and social criticism. This interweaving of diverse ele-
ments is a hallmark of Latin American culture. In this section you will
learn how Latin Americans express their culture through religion, the
arts, and everyday life.
Religion
Religion has long played an important role in Latin American society.
During the colonial era, most Latin Americans became Christians, and
Christianity still has the most followers. In addition, other faiths are
found in the region. For example, scores of traditional Native American
and African religions thrive, often mixed with Christianity and other
faiths. Islam, Hinduism, and Buddhism, brought by Asian immigrants,
are practiced in the West Indies and coastal areas of South America.
Judaism has followers in the largest Latin American cities.
226 Unit 3
Masked dancer at a Peruvian festival


===== PAGE 18 =====
Chapter 9 227
Roman Catholicism
Most Christians in Latin America are Roman
Catholics, and Roman Catholic traditions influ-
ence daily life in the region. During colonial times
Roman Catholicism was the official religion of the
Spanish colonies and Brazil. Roman Catholic
clergy had accompanied European conquerors
and colonists to the Americas. They established
Roman Catholicism throughout Latin America,
converting many Native Americans to their faith.
When European settlers arrived, the priests saw to
their spiritual needs as well.
Before long, church leaders were playing an
important role in political affairs in the region,
and the Roman Catholic Church had become
wealthy. When the fight for independence came,
church officials backed the wealthy and powerful
classes. During the late 1900s, however, Roman
Catholics in Latin America began to support the
concerns of the poor and the oppressed. In recent
years many Roman Catholic clergy and laypeople
have opposed dictatorships and worked to improve
the lives of disadvantaged groups. For example,
the Church has been active in movements for land
reform and for improvements in education and
health care.
Protestantism
Various forms of Protestant Christianity came to
Latin America with British and Dutch settlers in
the 1800s. In time American Protestant missionar-
ies came and built hospitals, schools, and colleges.
Protestants in the region were few in number until
the late 1900s, when Protestantism grew rapidly.
According to religious observers, many Latin
Americans were drawn to Protestantism because it
gave laypeople a major role in religious life and
emphasized personal religious experience.
A Mixing of Religions
Throughout Latin America a mixing of religions
has occurred since the colonial era. Many Latin
Roman Catholic 82.3%
Sources: World Almanac, 2001; Britannica Book of the Year, 2000
Other Christian .3%
Non-Christian 3.5%
Nonreligious 2.9%
Protestant
8.6 %
Roman Catholic
Protestant
Non-Christian
Nonreligious
Other Christian 
454,105,000
47 ,288,000
19,091,000
15,824,000
1,624,000
Religion Number of Followers
GRAPH STUDY
Latin America: Religions
2. Applying Geography Skills Why are large
portions of Latin America’s population Roman
Catholic?1. Interpreting Graphs What percentage of Latin
Americans are Roman Catholic? Protestant?


===== PAGE 19 =====
228 Unit 3
Americans today practice syncretism—a blend-
ing of beliefs and practices from different reli-
gions into a single faith. Some Latin Americans,
for example, especially Native Americans, wor-
ship at Roman Catholic churches on Sunday but
pray to nature deities during the week. Among
the descendants of enslaved Africans, belief in
West African deities is combined with Roman
Catholic devotion to the saints. Called condomblé
in Brazil, Santería in Cuba, and voodoo in Haiti
and the Dominican Republic , these African-
based religions have thousands of followers in
Latin America and among Latin American immi-
grants to the United States.
The Arts of Latin America
For centuries, the arts and literature of Latin
America were shaped by European styles.
Today’s Latin American artists and writers have
developed styles that often reflect their diverse
ethnic heritages, blending European styles with
those of Native American cultures.
History
Traditional Arts
Native Americans produced the earliest art
forms in Latin America. They left a legacy of weav-
ing, woodcarving, pottery, and metalwork. The
intricate, colorful handwoven textiles produced in
Guatemala and the Andes regions reflect Mayan
symbols and Incan weaving. The work of contem-
porary goldsmiths, silversmiths, and jewelers is
matched only by the sophisticated metalwork
from the pre-Columbian era, the time before the
arrival of Columbus.
Native Americans built temples decorated with
colored murals, or wall paintings, and mosaics, pic-
tures or designs made by setting small bits of colored
stone, tile, or shell into mortar. Native Americans
also created the region’s earliest music and dance. 
During colonial times the arts were largely
inspired by European works. Most paintings had
Christian themes. Murals, however, mixed the
brightly colored abstract designs of the Native
Americans with the more realistic European styles.
music of LATIN AMERICA
World Music: A Cultural Legacy Hear music of this region on Disc 1, Tracks 7 –12.
A wide mix of music traditions in Latin America comes
from the native inhabitants (wind and percussion instru-
ments), the Europeans (strings, vocal harmonies), and
the Africans (drums, varied rhythms).
Instrument Spotlight
Panpipes are one of the most common 
musical instruments from the Andean
region of South America, dating
from before the arrival of the Euro-
peans. Often called zampona or
siku, panpipes are made of bamboo
in varying sizes and pitches.Individ-
ual bamboo stalks are cut precisely
and lashed together in rows with
strips of bamboo and string. The
notes of a given scale often alter-
nate from one set of pipes to
another. For a complete melody to
be played, the two rows of pipes are
stacked one on top of the other.


===== PAGE 20 =====
Chapter 9 229
Churches built in Spanish and Portuguese designs
often were enlivened by the ethnic details added
by Native American and African artists. Mean-
while, Africans brought to the region the rhythms,
songs, and dances that evolved into today’s Latin
American musical styles and dances, such as
calypso, reggae, and samba.
Modern Arts
During the 1900s Latin American artists mixed
European, Native American, and African artistic
traditions. Many of them also focused on social
and political subjects. Diego Rivera, a well-
known Mexican artist, created huge murals that
illustrated key events in Mexico’s history, espe-
cially the struggles of impoverished farmers to
win social justice. Other noted Latin American
painters included Mexico’s Frida Kahlo, known
for her self-portraits, and Colombia’s Fernando
Botero, who satirized the lifestyles of Latin
America’s upper classes.
Latin American music combines Native American,
European, and African influences to create unique
styles. These musical styles include Brazilian
samba, Cuban salsa, and Mexican mariachi.
During the past 50 years, Latin American archi-
tects, dancers, and writers also have won interna-
tional recognition. The Brazilian architect Oscar
Niemeyer is known for the buildings he designed in
the Brazilian capital of Brasília . Dance companies
such as the Ballet Folklórico of Mexico fascinate
audiences worldwide with their performances of
traditional Native American and Spanish dances.
Latin America also has produced outstanding nov-
elists, such as Colombia’s Gabriel García Márquez
and Chile’s Isabel Allende, who skillfully blend
everyday reality with the mythical and fantastic in
their writings. A continuing theme of Latin Ameri-
can literature is cultural identity. The Argentine poet
Jorge Luis Borges wrote of this theme in his life:
“
From a lineage of Protestant ministers
and South American soldiers who
fought, with their incalculable dust,
against the Spaniards and the desert
lances, I am and am not . . .
”
“Yesterdays,” Jorge Luis Borges:
Selected Poems, Alexander Coleman,
ed., Stephen Kessler, trans., 1999
Everyday Life 
Latin Americans place great emphasis on social
status and family life. They also cherish values
such as personal honor and individual freedom.
Families
Most Latin Americans have a strong sense of loy-
alty to family. Each person is part of
an extended family that includes
grandparents, aunts, uncles, and
cousins as well as parents and chil-
dren. Latin American parents and
children often share their home with
grandparents and sometimes other
members of the extended family.
Compadres, or godparents, play an
important role in family life. Godpar-
ents are people chosen by the mother
and father to sponsor their new baby.
Godparents are concerned with the
child’s religious and moral upbring-
ing and help take care of the child if
something happens to the parents.
Latin American society still dis-
plays traces of machismo, a Spanish
and Portuguese tradition of male
Diego Rivera’s mural Teatro Insurgentes depicts leaders of the
Mexican Revolution.


===== PAGE 21 =====
supremacy, although women have made rapid
advances in public life in recent decades. Latin
American women are in charge of home life, mak-
ing important financial and family decisions. Each
year more women attend universities and hold
jobs in a variety of professions. Many have been
elected as national legislators, as mayors of large
cities, and as country leaders. For example, in
1999, Panama elected Mireya Elisa Moscoso as
president.
Education and Health Care
The quality of education varies throughout Latin
America. Children generally are required to complete
elementary school, but they often do not because of
long distances to school and lack of money for cloth-
ing and supplies. Also, many children drop out to
help with family farming or to find jobs.
Despite such realities many Latin American
countries have made gains in education. Adult lit-
eracy rates have risen steadily, governments now
devote more funds to schools, and some countries
have seen impressive gains in school attendance.
University enrollment also is rising,
as some public universities provide
higher education at little or no cost to
students. Although Latin America
has lagged behind some other
regions in computer literacy, Internet
usage is beginning to transform edu-
cation in countries such as Chile and
Mexico.
In Latin America, as in other regions,
health care is linked to standards of
living. As people become employed
and better educated, health concerns
linked to poverty, lack of sanitation,
and malnutrition, a serious condition
caused by a lack of proper food, become
much less severe. Today, despite a wide
gap between the rich and the poor, Latin
America overall is improving the health
of its people. Infant mortality rates for
the region have fallen dramatically in recent years,
and most people now have access to clean, treated
water for drinking.
Still, health conditions vary from country to coun-
try. In lands with prosperous economies and high
standards of living, such as Chile, people have
access to better health care systems and are able to
live healthier, longer lives. By contrast, countries
with less developed economies, such as Haiti, have
little money to spend on health care. Consequently,
disease is more prevalent and life expectancy is low.
In most Latin American countries, the quality of
health care falls between these two extremes.
Sports and Leisure
Throughout Latin America fans are as passion-
ate about fútbol, or soccer, as fans in the United
States are about American football. In many Latin
American countries it is the national sport. Thou-
sands of dedicated spectators crowd into huge
stadiums to watch their teams play. Baseball, bas-
ketball, and volleyball also have large follow-
ings, especially in the West Indies. Many Latin
Extended
Families Family celebrations such as birthdays and
weddings are important traditions within extended families.
Region How do Latin Americans view families?


===== PAGE 22 =====
Checking for Understanding
1. Define syncretism, mural, mosaic,
extended family, malnutrition,
fútbol, jai alai.
2. Main IdeasCreate a chart like the
one below, and fill in the influences
that contributed to each aspect of
Latin American culture.
Critical Thinking
3. Making Inferences Why do 
you think Roman Catholicism 
has remained the predominant
religion in Latin America?
4. Drawing Conclusions Why do you
think Latin American arts imitated
the arts of Europe?
5. Making Generalizations On an
outline map, label the countries
of South America. What factors
do you think determine their
political boundaries?
6. Making Inferences Why might
parties— fiestas and festivals—
be so popular in Latin America?
Analyzing Charts
7. Place Study the graph showing
religions on page 227. Which reli-
gion in Latin America is second to
Roman Catholicism in its number
of followers?
8. Cultural Influences Make a
sketch map to show where
the region’s arts originated.
Include representative
examples of various art
forms and examples from
Africa, Europe, and Latin
America. Provide notes
about each example’s 
ethnic origins.
Applying Geography 
American baseball stars, including home-run hit-
ter Sammy Sosa from the Dominican Republic,
have gone on to play in the North American major
leagues. A favorite sport among many Mexicans
and Cubans is jai alai (HY• LY), a fast-paced game
much like handball, played with a ball and a long,
curved basket strapped to each player’s wrist.
Watching television, listening to the radio, and
attending movies, concerts, and plays are leisure
activities as popular in Latin America as they are
around the world. The most popular Latin
American leisure activity of all, however, may be
celebrating. From impromptu gatherings of friends
to special family dinners to religious feast days, and
patriotic events, almost any social occasion is a
party—a fiesta, or festival.
Perhaps the best-known festival is Carnival, cele-
brated in the week before the Roman Catholic
observance of Lent, a 40-day period of fasting and
prayer before Easter. In Rio de Janeiro, home of one
of the largest Carnival celebrations, teams from dif-
ferent parts of the city compete to win the prize for
the best hand-decorated float. People make their
own brightly colored masks and elaborate cos-
tumes and then parade to samba music through
the streets. Today Carnival draws people from
around the world to Latin America.
Fútbol The Brazilian star Ronaldo breaks through
the Italian defense during a tournament game.
Region What other sports have large followings in
Latin America?
Influences Aspects of Culture
Chapter 9 231
Cultures and Lifestyles


===== PAGE 23 =====
Learning the Skill
To determine a country’s over-
all population density, divide the
number of people within a coun-
try’s boundaries by its land area
in square miles or square kilo-
meters. The map at right shows
how population density differs
within Brazil.
• Study the map keys to deter-
mine what the colors and
symbols represent. Notice
that the map uses colors to
show population densities
and symbols to show the
populations of cities.
• Look for patterns that might
explain population density
patterns. Ask yourself what
geographical features are
shared by areas with high or
low population densities.
• Compare the map with other
regional information, such as
natural resources and physi-
cal geography, to draw con-
clusions about the possible
causes and effects of popula-
tion density patterns.
Practicing the Skill
Use the population density
map to answer the questions.
1. What does the dark orange
color represent?
2. What symbol represents
cities of more than 5,000,000
people?
Reading a Population
Density Map
P
opulation density measures how many people live within a
certain unit area, such as a square mile or square kilometer.
Population density may vary from place to place within a country
or region. A population density map shows you these variations.
232 Unit 3
3. Which areas of Brazil have
low population densities? 
4. Which areas have the highest
population densities?
5. Which two cities have the
most people?
6. Which cities have fewer than
2 million people?
7. Why do you think the east
coast of Brazil is more
densely populated?
 The Glencoe Skillbuilder 
Interactive Workbook,
Level 2 provides instruction and
practice in key social studies skills.
800
8000
0
mi.
km
Azimuthal Equidistant projection
Per sq. mi.Per sq. km
Over 250
125–250
60–125
2–60
Under 2
Over 100
50–100
25–50
1–25
Under 1
Over 5,000,000
2,000,000 –5,000,000
1,000,000–2,000,000
N
Cities
(Statistics reflect
metropolitan areas.)
60°W5 0 °W70°W
20°S
10°S
0° EQUATOR
TROPIC OF CAPRICORN
ATLaNTIC
OCEaN
PaCIFIC
OCEaN
BRAZIL Recife
Salvador
Belo Horizonte
Brasília
S˜ao Paulo
Curitiba
Porto
Alegre
Bel´emManaus
Rio de
Janeiro
Fortaleza
Brazil: Population Density
Compare the physical map of
Latin America with the population
density map. Write a paragraph
explaining how physical geogra-
phy affects population density.


===== PAGE 24 =====
Chapter 9 233
Organizing Your Notes
Use a graphic organizer like the
one below to help you organize
important details from this 
section.
Terms to Know
• glyph
• chinampas
• quipu
• conquistador
• viceroy
• caudillo
Organizing Your Notes
Use a time line like the one
below to help you organize your
notes on key historical events dis-
cussed in this section. 
Terms to Know
• indigenous
• dialect
• patois
• urbanization
• megacity
• primate city
SECTION 1 Population Patterns (pp. 211–217)
SECTION 2 History and Government (pp. 220–225)
SUMMARY & STUDY GUIDE
Peoples
Population
Patterns Migration
Terms to Know
• syncretism
• mural
• mosaic
• extended family
• malnutrition
• fútbol
• jai alai
Organizing Your Notes
Create an outline using the for-
mat below to help you organize
your notes for this section.
SECTION 3 Cultures and Lifestyles (pp. 226–231)
Cultures and Lifestyles
I. Religion
A. Roman Catholicism
B. Protestantism
Latin American History
Before
1500
1600 1700 1800 1900 2000
Event:
Location:
Key Points
• Latin America’s people descended from indige-
nous peoples, Europeans, Africans, and Asians.
• Latin Americans speak Spanish, Portuguese,
other European languages, indigenous lan-
guages, and mixed dialects or patois.
• Latin America’s population is mostly concen-
trated in coastal areas.
• Urbanization has created an imbalance in Latin
America’s population density.
• The region has some of the world’s largest cities.
Key Points
• The Maya, the Aztec, and the Inca developed
complex civilizations before Europeans arrived.
• Spanish and Portuguese colonization had lasting
effects on Latin America’s culture.
• Most Latin American countries achieved inde-
pendence during the 1800s.
• Most Latin American countries developed
democratic self-rule in the twentieth century.
• The political, economic, and cultural legacy of
colonialism still challenges Latin America.
Key Points
• Religion plays an important role in Latin 
American life.
• Educational quality varies throughout the region.
• As each country improves its economy, nutrition,
and sanitation, people’s health improves.
• Latin American traditional arts, music, and liter-
ature reflect the region’s cultural diversity.
• Deep divisions between economic and social
classes still characterize Latin American life.
• Latin Americans value family activities, sports such
as fútbol and jai alai, and holidays and festivals.


===== PAGE 25 =====
Critical Thinking
1. Categorizing Information Define the
types of migration that occur in the region.
2. Making Comparisons Compare social and
family life in Latin America and the United
States.
3. Identifying Cause and Effect Use a dia-
gram like the one below to fill in three lasting
effects of colonialism.
Reviewing Key Terms
Write the key term that best matches each
description. Refer to the Terms to Know in the
Summary & Study Guide on page 233.
1. native; original inhabitant
2. two popular sports in Latin America
3. designs made by setting small pieces of 
colored stone, tile, or shell into mortar 
4. grandparents, aunts, uncles, cousins 
5. two language variations
6. a city that dominates its country ’s
economy and government 
7. knotted cords used for keeping
accounts 
8. Spanish or Portuguese conqueror
9. government officials appointed by
European monarchs
10. a city with more than 10 million
inhabitants
11. mixing of diverse religious traditions
12. wall painting
13. Mayan picture writing 
14. migration from rural areas to cities
15. condition caused by lack of food
Reviewing Facts
SECTION 1
1. Where is most of South America’s
population located? 
2. Why is the region’s population den-
sity unbalanced? 
SECTION 2
3. Name three indigenous Latin
American empires.
4. What fueled the movement for
Latin American independence?
SECTION 3
5. What ancient art form inspired 
the region’s painters?
6. What sports are most popular in
Latin America?
Locating Places
Latin America: Political Geography
Match the letters on the map with the places of Latin America. Write 
your answers on a sheet of paper.
1. Caracas
2. Brasília
3. Port-au-Prince
4. Santiago
5. Montevideo
6. Bogotá
7. Quito
8. Havana
9. Mexico City
10. La Paz, Sucre
11. Buenos Aires
12. Lima
60°W80°W4 0 °W100°W120°W
40°S
20°N
20°S
0°
TROPIC OF CANCER
TROPIC OF CAPRICORN
EQUATOR
B
A
C
DF
G
I
J
K
K
L
H E
Azimuthal Equidistant projection
1,000
1,0000
0
mi.
km
N
ASSESSMENT & ACTIVITIES
234 Unit 3
Cultural Effects of Colonialism


===== PAGE 26 =====
Chapter X 235
Do not quickly choose the first answer
that makes sense—your answer will
most likely be incorrect. This question
asks you to identify which statement is not true.
Eliminate any answer choices you know to be true
before selecting the correct answer.
Self-Check Quiz Visit the Glencoe World
Geography Web site at tx.geography.glencoe.com
and click on Self-Check Quizzes—Chapter 9 to
prepare for the Chapter Test.
Using the Regional Atlas
Refer to the Regional Atlas on pages 182–185.
1. Place What features draw a large popula-
tion to the Buenos Aires area?
2. Human-Environment Interaction Study
the physical and population density maps.
Why are parts of Argentina and Bolivia
uninhabited?
Thinking Like a Geographer
Trace the diffusion and exchange of foods between
the Americas and other parts of the world. Describe
the foods involved, their place of origin, and their
effects on the places to which they spread.
Problem-Solving Activity
Contemporary Issues Case Study Using the
Internet, research a democratic country in Latin
America. Then write a report that discusses the
spread and adaptation of democracy to that
country. Also, explain how other countries in 
the region might learn from its experience. Use 
photos, charts, and other graphics in your report.
GeoJournal
Descriptive WritingUsing the information you
logged in your GeoJournal, write a paragraph
describing European or African influences on the
art or religion of a particular Latin American coun-
try. Use additional resources to make your descrip-
tions as vivid and accurate as possible.
Technology Activity
Creating an Electronic Database
Use reliable sources to gather population data
for the past 10 years for three Latin American
countries. Choose one category of information,
such as literacy rates, population under age 18,
or male/female ratio. Create an electronic com-
puter database, and then use computer software
to design and draw a graph or chart. Present
your conclusions orally to the class, using the
graph or chart to illustrate your findings.
Chapter 9 235
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Choose the best answer for each of the follow-
ing multiple-choice questions. If you have
trouble answering the questions, use the
process of elimination to narrow your choices.
1. Latin American peoples speak a variety
of languages. Which of the following
statements is NOT true?
A Millions of Latin Americans speak Native
American languages.
B Portuguese is the official language of most
Latin American countries.
C French is the official language in some
Latin American countries.
D Many Latin Americans are bilingual.
2. Diego Rivera was a Mexican artist who
was well known for his creation of
F folk dramas.
G woven tapestry.
H political and social satires in poetry.
J large murals of historic events.
This question is factual. Try to recall
what you know about Rivera, consider-
ing that he was a popular modern
artist and important political activist.

